The arrow of history is four questions
	1. Does history have a direction?
	2. Where to?
	3. How to measure the movement?
	4. What guarantees the movement?

How to measure movement in the needed direction?
You need a measurable parameter. Which one?
## The examination system

Suppose there exists a list of examinations with the following properties.

1. All citizens of the state are admitted to examination №1. Whoever passes is admitted to examination №2, and so on.
2. One may not take examinations at all — then your rank is 0.
3. One may take them and reach the end successfully. Then your rank equals the number of examinations on the list
4. One may fail one examination. Then your rank equals the number of examinations successfully passed.
5. We set a minimum size of an estate (for example 100).
6. People of the same rank X form estate number X only if their number is greater than or equal to the minimum size of an estate.
7. The rank of a society is the highest rank among all its estates.

To show up for an examination takes intellectual courage. To pass an examination takes intellectual power.

Thus, if the rank of a society rises, then its members (as a whole) gain in intellectual courage and power (measured by rank).

## Why that way?

Rank is status in society. Everyone wants a higher status. All try; some break records.

True, this is not true of every society.

If the Arrow of History is a problem, then I know two solutions.

The coarse solution is described in chapter 10.4.3. Myth–religion–science. History divides into three epochs. Examinations must be passed for Author or transmitter

The precise solution is levels.
Eight levels — eight epochs.
And for this solution there is an answer to the question “what here is the propulsion and how does it work” (and for the coarse solution there is no such answer)
